# Contributing

New contributors would be extremely welcome.

## How to publish a new version

This repository uses [changesets](https://github.com/changesets/changesets) to automate its versioning and release process. When contributing to this repo, your pull request should contain a "changeset" that can be generated by running `pnpm changeset` from your branch locally.

The changeset CLI will ask you to enter the corresponding semver bump type and a description of your changes: feel free to enter a brief description via the command line and continue editing the generated Markdown file found inside of the `.changeset` directory in your editor of choice. When editing your changeset's Markdown file, you can leverage any of the features of GitHub flavored markdown! The description you provide in your changeset will be used to generate an entry in CHANGELOG.md and the release notes in a future release, so the more complete and descriptive the better.

In summary, before you submit a pull request, perform the following steps:

1. Run `pnpm changeset`
2. Answer the questions in the interactive prompt.
3. Commit the changes.

## Formatting & Linting

This project uses [oxlint](https://oxc.rs/docs/guide/usage/linter.html) to lint. Unfortunately, the oxc formatter is not yet available nor are there any VSCode extensions ready for use yet.

Please make sure to adhere to the following style conventions:

- **No tabs**
- **No semicolons**
- **Two-space indendation **
- **Singlequoted strings**

If you use VSCode, the included `.vscode/settings.json` should be able to perform the formatting necessary for now as we wait for the oxc formatter to and its corresponding VSCode extension to be released.

## Development & Testing

**`@fastify/vite`**, **`@fastify/vue`** and **`@fastify/react`** live in the [same monorepo](https://github.com/fastify/fastify-vite) and are set up to work as a [**pnpm workspace**](https://pnpm.io/workspaces).

The `examples/` also serve as test suites. Running `pnpm test` from the root folder after making changes to `@fastify/vite` will run the tests for all examples.
